.TH CT-PROB 1 "February 2008" "UNAFold 3.6" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ct-prob \- calculate probabilities based on a .ct file.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ct-prob
.I FILE.ct
.RI [ FILE.plot ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBct-prob\fR reads a set of stuctures in \fI.ct\fR format from \fIFILE.ct\fR and computes the probability of each base pair.  These probabilities are written to standard output, in the same format as the \fI.plot\fR files written by \fBhybrid\fR, \fBhybrid-ss\fR, etc.
.P
If \fIFILE.plot\fR is given, it is taken to contain the expected probabilities for each base pair.  The output is then extended to include for each base pair the expected probability, the standard deviation and the relative error.
.SH REFERENCES
Markham, N. R. and Zuker, M. (2008) UNAFold: software for nucleic acid folding and hybridization.  In Keith, J. M., editor, \fIBioinformatics, Volume II.  Structure, Functions and Applications\fR, number 453 in \fIMethods in Molecular Biology\fR, chapter 1, pages 3-31.  Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.  ISBN 978-1-60327-428-9.
.P
Other references which may be useful may be found at http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/refs.php.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR hybrid (1),
.BR hybrid-ss (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Nick Markham <markhn@rpi.edu> and Michael Zuker <zukerm@rpi.edu>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2006-2008, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
.SH AVAILABILITY
UNAFold is available from http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/unafold/.  Commercial use requires a license; see http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/commercial.php.
