.TH ENSEMBLE-EXT 1 "February 2008" "UNAFold 3.6" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ensemble-ext, ensemble-ext-same \- compute extinction of an ensemble of species
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ensemble-ext
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.I PREFIX1 PREFIX2
.br
.B ensemble-ext-same
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.I PREFIX
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBensemble-ext\fR computes the extinction of a two-sequence ensemble.  The input to \fBensemble-ext\fR consists of the outputs of running \fBhybrid\fR or \fBhybrid-ss\fR on each species, as well as the output of running \fBconcentration\fR on the ensemble.  \fBensemble-ext\fR writes \fIPREFIX1-PREFIX2.ens.ext\fR which containts the extinction of the ensemble at each temperature.  It also writes \fIPREFIX1-PREFIX2.ens.TmExt1\fR and \fIPREFIX1-PREFIX2.ens.TmExt2\fR, which contain the inflection and halfway points of the extinction curve.  Both are approximations of the melting temperature; the latter is preferred.  The file \fIPREFIX1-PREFIX2.ens.MaxExt\fR contains the maximum possible extinction, i.e. the extinction if all bases were unpaired.
.P
\fBensemble-ext-same\fR operates in the same manner on a one-sequence ensemble, using the output from \fBconcentration-same\fR.
.P
It is recommended to use \fBhybrid2.pl\fR to run \fBhybrid\fR, \fBhybrid-ss\fR, \fBconcentration\fR, \fBconcentrations.pl\fR and \fBensemble-dg\fR and \fBensemble-ext\fR instead of running \fBensemble-ext\fR directly.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -n ", " --NA =RNA|DNA
sets nucleic acid type to RNA or DNA.  Default is RNA.
.TP
.BR -p ", " --points =\fInumber
use \fInumber\fR points on either side of each point when performing numerical differentiation to determine the inflection point.  Default is 1.
.TP
.BR -x ", " --exclude =A|B|AA|BB
excludes the specified species from consideration.  May be used more than once, to exclude multiple species.
.TP
.BR -H ", " --enthalpy =\fIvalue
assigns \fIvalue\fR kcal/mol of enthalpy to stacking in single strands, in proportion to the lengths of the sequences.  Must be used with \fB--entropy\fR.
.TP
.BR -S ", " --entropy =\fIvalue
assigns \fIvalue\fR cal/mol/K of entropy to stacking in single strands, in proportion to the lengths of the sequences.  Must be used with \fB--enthalpy\fR.
.TP
.BR -o ", " --output =\fIprefix
names output files with \fIprefix\fR.
.SH OBSCURE OPTIONS
.TP
.B --single
only sum extinctions for each nucelotide, rather than for each dinucleotide.
.SH REFERENCES
Markham, N. R. and Zuker, M. (2008) UNAFold: software for nucleic acid folding and hybridization.  In Keith, J. M., editor, \fIBioinformatics, Volume II.  Structure, Functions and Applications\fR, number 453 in \fIMethods in Molecular Biology\fR, chapter 1, pages 3-31.  Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.  ISBN 978-1-60327-428-9.
.P
Other references which may be useful may be found at http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/refs.php.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR hybrid (1),
.BR hybrid-ss (1),
.BR concentration (1),
.BR concentration-same (1),
.BR hybrid2.pl (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Nick Markham <markhn@rpi.edu> and Michael Zuker <zukerm@rpi.edu>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2006-2008, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
.SH AVAILABILITY
UNAFold is available from http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/unafold/.  Commercial use requires a license; see http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/commercial.php.
