.TH VANTHOFF-PLOT.PL 1 "February 2008" "UNAFold 3.6" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
vantHoff-plot.pl \- create a van't Hoff plot.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vantHoff-plot.pl
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.I FILE1
.RI [ FILE2 ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBvantHoff-plot.pl\fR creates a van't Hoff plot, in which the inverse of melting temperature is plotted as a function of the logarithm of total strand concentration.  For a two-state melt, this results in a line with slope equal to R divided by the enthalpy change.
.P
\fBhybrid\fR and \fBhybrid-ss\fR, or their equivalents, must be run for the five species before running \fBvantHoff-plot.pl\fR.  This is most easily done with \fBhybrid2.pl\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -n ", " --NA =RNA|DNA
sets nucleic acid type to RNA or DNA.  Default is RNA.
.TP
.BR -C ", " --Ct =\fIconc
sets total strand concentration to \fIconc\fR.
.TP
.BR -x ", " --exclude =A|B|AA|BB
excludes the specified species from consideration.  May be used more than once, to exclude multiple species.
.TP
.BR --fraction =\fIvalue
assigns \fIvalue\fR of the stacking enthalpy for each sequence with its reverse complement to stacking in the single strands.  Default is 0.1.  To disable entirely, use \fB--nofraction\fR.
.TP
.B --nofraction
removes stacking in unfolded single strands from consideration.
.TP
.BR --Tmelt =\fItemp
assigns entropy to single strands so that melting temperature is \fItemp\fR.  Default is 50.
.TP
.BR -o ", " --output =\fIprefix
name output files with \fIprefix\fR.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP UNAFOLDDAT
an alternate location from which to read the energy rules.  The default energy rules can be overridden with files in the current directory or in the directory pointed to by UNAFOLDDAT.  \fBvantHoff-plot.pl\fR looks for each file first in the current directory, then in the directory specified by UNAFOLDDAT and last in \fI/usr/local/share/unafold\fR (or wherever the energy rules were installed).
.SH REFERENCES
Markham, N. R. and Zuker, M. (2008) UNAFold: software for nucleic acid folding and hybridization.  In Keith, J. M., editor, \fIBioinformatics, Volume II.  Structure, Functions and Applications\fR, number 453 in \fIMethods in Molecular Biology\fR, chapter 1, pages 3-31.  Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.  ISBN 978-1-60327-428-9.
.P
Other references which may be useful may be found at http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/refs.php.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR hybrid (1),
.BR hybrid-ss (1),
.BR hybrid2.pl (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Nick Markham <markhn@rpi.edu> and Michael Zuker <zukerm@rpi.edu>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2006-2008, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
.SH AVAILABILITY
UNAFold is available from http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/unafold/.  Commercial use requires a license; see http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/commercial.php.
