.TH DG2DH 1 "February 2008" "UNAFold 3.6" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
dG2dH, dG2dS \- compute enthalpy and entropy based on free energy
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dG2dH
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.I FILE
.br
.B dG2dS
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.I FILE
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBdG2dH\fR computes (actually estimates) the enthalpy corresponding to a given free energy.  The free energy is read from \fIFILE\fR, and the enthalpy is computed as G - T * dG / dT - that is, the free energy minus the temperature (in kelvins) times the derivative of free energy with respect to temeprature.  The computed enthalpy at each temperature is written to \fIprefix.H\fR and the change in enthalpy, i.e. the difference between the first and last values, is written to \fIprefix.dH\fR.  \fIprefix\fR is \fIFILE\fR with a trailing \fI.dG\fR removed, if applicable.
.P
\fBdG2dS\fR fuctions the same way but computes entropy instead of enthalpy.  The entropy is -dG / dT - that is, the negation of the derivative of the free energy with respect to temperature.  \fBdG2dS\fR writes \fIprefix.S\fR and \fIprefix.dS\fR instead of \fIprefix.H\fR and \fIprefix.dH\fR.
.P
Typically, the \fI.dG\fR file used as input should come from \fBensemble-dg\fR or \fBensemble-dg-same\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -p ", " --points =\fInumber
use \fInumber\fR points on either side of each point when performing numerical differentiation.  Default is 1.
.SH REFERENCES
Markham, N. R. and Zuker, M. (2008) UNAFold: software for nucleic acid folding and hybridization.  In Keith, J. M., editor, \fIBioinformatics, Volume II.  Structure, Functions and Applications\fR, number 453 in \fIMethods in Molecular Biology\fR, chapter 1, pages 3-31.  Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.  ISBN 978-1-60327-428-9.
.P
Other references which may be useful may be found at http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/refs.php.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ensemble-dg (1),
.BR ensemble-dg-same (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Nick Markham <markhn@rpi.edu> and Michael Zuker <zukerm@rpi.edu>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2006-2008, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
.SH AVAILABILITY
UNAFold is available from http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/unafold/.  Commercial use requires a license; see http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/commercial.php.
