.TH ENSEMBLE-DG 1 "February 2008" "UNAFold 3.6" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ensemble-dg, ensemble-dg-same \- compute free energy of an ensemble of species
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ensemble-dg
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.I PREFIX1 PREFIX2
.br
.B ensemble-dg-same
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.I PREFIX
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBensemble-dg\fR computes the free energy fo a two-sequence ensemble.  The input to \fBensemble-dg\fR consists of the outputs of running \fBhybrid\fR or \fBhybrid-ss\fR on each species, as well as the output of running \fBconcentration\fR on the ensemble.  \fBensemble-dg\fR writes \fIPREFIX1-PREFIX2.ens.dG\fR which containts the partition function and free energy of the ensemble at each temperature.
.P
\fBensemble-dg-same\fR operates in the same manner on a one-sequence ensemble, using the output from \fBconcentration-same\fR.
.P
It is recommended to use \fBhybrid2.pl\fR to run \fBhybrid\fR, \fBhybrid-ss\fR, \fBconcentration\fR, \fBconcentrations.pl\fR and \fBensemble-dg\fR and \fBensemble-ext\fR instead of running \fBensemble-dg\fR directly.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -x ", " --exclude =A|B|AA|BB
excludes the specified species from consideration.  May be used more than once, to exclude multiple species.
.TP
.BR -H ", " --enthalpy =\fIvalue
assigns \fIvalue\fR kcal/mol of enthalpy to stacking in single strands, in proportion to the lengths of the sequences.  Must be used with \fB--entropy\fR.
.TP
.BR -S ", " --entropy =\fIvalue
assigns \fIvalue\fR cal/mol/K of entropy to stacking in single strands, in proportion to the lengths of the sequences.  Must be used with \fB--enthalpy\fR.
.TP
.BR -o ", " --output =\fIprefix
names output files with \fIprefix\fR.
.TP
.BR -Y ", " --infinity
enables "infinite temperature correction": the partition functions for each species are corrected according to values in \fIA.inf\fR, \fIB.inf\fR, \fIA-A.inf\fR, \fIB-B.inf\fR and \fIA-B.inf\fR.
.SH REFERENCES
Markham, N. R. and Zuker, M. (2008) UNAFold: software for nucleic acid folding and hybridization.  In Keith, J. M., editor, \fIBioinformatics, Volume II.  Structure, Functions and Applications\fR, number 453 in \fIMethods in Molecular Biology\fR, chapter 1, pages 3-31.  Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.  ISBN 978-1-60327-428-9.
.P
Other references which may be useful may be found at http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/refs.php.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR hybrid (1),
.BR hybrid-ss (1),
.BR concentration (1),
.BR concentration-same (1),
.BR hybrid2.pl (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Nick Markham <markhn@rpi.edu> and Michael Zuker <zukerm@rpi.edu>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2006-2008, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
.SH AVAILABILITY
UNAFold is available from http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/unafold/.  Commercial use requires a license; see http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/commercial.php.
