.TH ITC-PLOT.PL 1 "February 2008" "UNAFold 3.6" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ITC-plot.pl \- create an isothermal titration calorimetry plot
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ITC-plot.pl
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.I FILE1 FILE2
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBITC-plot.pl\fR simulates isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), in which the concentration of one sequence is held constant while that of the other sequence is slowly increased.  An ITC plot shows the enthalpy change at each step divided by the change in concentration as a function of concentration.
.P
\fBhybrid\fR and \fBhybrid-ss\fR, or their equivalents, must be run for the five species before running ITC-plot.pl.  This is most easily done with \fBhybrid2.pl\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -n ", " --NA =RNA|DNA
sets nucleic acid type to RNA or DNA.  Default is RNA.
.TP
.BR -t ", " --temperature =\fItemp
sets temperature to \fItemp\fR.  Default is 37.
.TP
.BR -A ", " --A0 =\fIconc
fixes the total concentration of A present at \fIconc\fR molar.
.TP
.BR -B ", " --B0 =\fIconc
fixes the total concentration of B present at \fIconc\fR molar.
.TP
.BR -x ", " --exclude =A|B|AA|BB
excludes the specified species from consideration.  May be used more than once, to exclude multiple species.
.TP
.BR --fraction =\fIvalue
assigns \fIvalue\fR of the stacking enthalpy for each sequence with its reverse complement to stacking in the single strands.  Default is 0.1.  To disable entirely, use \fB--nofraction\fR.
.TP
.B --nofraction
removes stacking in unfolded single strands from consideration.
.TP
.BR --Tmelt =\fItemp
assigns entropy to single strands so that melting temperature is \fItemp\fR.  Default is 50.
.TP
.BR -o ", " --output =\fIprefix
name output files with \fIprefix\fR.
.TP
.BR -r ", " --reuse
assumes that \fBITC-plot.pl\fR has already been run and creates a new plot based on existing ITC data.
.TP
.B --hyperbolic
creates hyperbolic plots (enthalpy versus concentration) instead of sigmoidal plots (change in enthalpy divided by change in concentration versus concentration).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP UNAFOLDDAT
an alternate location from which to read the energy rules.  The default energy rules can be overridden with files in the current directory or in the directory pointed to by UNAFOLDDAT.  \fBITC-plot.pl\fR looks for each file first in the current directory, then in the directory specified by UNAFOLDDAT and last in \fI/usr/local/share/unafold\fR (or wherever the energy rules were installed).
.SH REFERENCES
Markham, N. R. and Zuker, M. (2008) UNAFold: software for nucleic acid folding and hybridization.  In Keith, J. M., editor, \fIBioinformatics, Volume II.  Structure, Functions and Applications\fR, number 453 in \fIMethods in Molecular Biology\fR, chapter 1, pages 3-31.  Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.  ISBN 978-1-60327-428-9.
.P
Other references which may be useful may be found at http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/refs.php.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR hybrid (1),
.BR hybrid-ss (1),
.BR hybrid2.pl (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Nick Markham <markhn@rpi.edu> and Michael Zuker <zukerm@rpi.edu>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2006-2008, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
.SH AVAILABILITY
UNAFold is available from http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/unafold/.  Commercial use requires a license; see http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/commercial.php.
