.TH UNAFOLD.PL 1 "February 2008" "UNAFold 3.6" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
UNAFold.pl \- fold an RNA or DNA sequence with lots of output
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B UNAFold.pl
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.I FILE
.RI [ FILE ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
If one \fIFILE\fR is specified, \fBUNAFold.pl\fR folds the (first) sequence in \fIFILE\fR with \fBhybrid-ss-min\fR, and then computes the h-num and ss-count values.  If two \fIFILE\fRs are specified, \fBUNAFold.pl\fR hybridized the first sequence in each \fIFILE\fR with \fBhybrid-min\fR.  All output files are named with a \fIprefix\fR which consists of the file name(s) with the extension .seq removed.  The loop free energy decomposition is written to \fIprefix.det\fR or \fIprefix.det.html\fR.  If \fBboxplot_ng\fR is available, the enrgy dot plot is created in Postscript format and, if possible, in PNG, JPEG or GIF format.  Likewise, if \fBsir_graph_ng\fR is available, each structure is drawn in Postscript and, if possible, PNG/JPEG/GIF formats.  In addition, each structrure is available in XRNA ss format, and the complete set of foldings in RNAML format is written to \fIprefix.rnaml\fR.  Finally, in HTML mode, \fIprefix.html\fR contains links to all of the output.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -n ", " --NA =RNA|DNA
sets nucleic acid type to RNA or DNA.  Default is RNA.
.TP
.BR -t ", " --temp =\fItemperature
sets folding temperature to \fItemperature\fR.  Default is 37.
.TP
.BR -N ", " --sodium =\fIvalue
sets Sodium ion concentration to \fIvalue\fR molar.  Default is 1.
.TP
.BR -M ", " --magnesium =\fIvalue
sets Magnesium ion concentration to \fIvalue\fR molar.  Default is 0.
.TP
.BR -p ", " --polymer
use salt corrections for polymers instead of oligomers (the default).
.TP
.BR -I ", " --noisolate
prohibits all isolated basepairs.  Isolated basepairs are helices of length 1; that is, they do not stack on another basepair on either side.  (See also the \fB--prefilter\fR option below.)
.TP
.BR -m ", " --maxbp =\fIvalue
Bases farther apart than \fIvalue\fR cannot form.  Default is no limit.
.TP
.BR -c ", " --constraints =\fIfile
reads a list of constraints from \fIfile\fR.  Constraints must be in the form "P \fIi\fR \fIj\fR \fIk\fR" or "F \fIi\fR \fIj\fR \fIk\fR".  These are equivalent to specifying "--prohibit=\fIi\fR,\fIj\fR,\fIk\fR" and "--force=\fIi\fR,\fIj\fR,\fIk\fR", respectively.  If \fIfile\fR is not specified, it defaults to \fIprefix.aux\fR.
.TP
.BR -C ", " --circular
treats sequences as circular rather than linear.
.TP
.BR -P ", " --percent =\fIvalue
sets the energy increment to \fIvalue\fR percent.  Defauls is 5.
.TP
.BR -W ", " --window =\fIvalue
sets the window parameter to \fIvalue\fR.  Default is determined by sequence length.
.TP
.BR -X ", " --max =\fIvalue
sets the maximum number of foldings to \fIvalue\fR.  Default is 100.
.TP
.BR --ann =none|p-num|ss-count
optionally produces plots annotated with p-num or ss-count values.  Default is none.
.TP
.BR --mode =auto|bases|lines
produces structures drawn with bases or lines.  Default is auto.
.TP
.BR --label =\fInumber
labels every \fInumber\fRth base.
.TP
.BR --rotate =\fIangle
rotates structures by \fIangle\fR degrees.
.TP
.BR --run-type =text|html
produces output in plain text (the default) or HTML.
.TP
.BR --model =EM|PF
performs an energy minimization (the default) or partition function calculation.  In partition function mode, stochastic tracebacks replace the mfold sample and a probability dot plot replaces the energy dot plot.
.SH OBSCURE OPTIONS
.TP
.B --allpairs
allows basepairs to form between any two nucleotides.  When \fB--allpairs\fR is not specified, only Watson-Crick and wobble basepairs are allowed.
.TP
.BR --maxloop =\fIsize
sets the maximum size of bulge/interior loops to \fIsize\fR.  Default is 30.
.TP
.B --nodangle
removes single-base stacking from consideration.
.TP
.B --simple
makes the penalty for multibranch loops constant rather than affine.
.TP
.BR --prefilter =\fIvalue1\fR[,\fIvalue2\fR]
Sets the prefilter to filter out all basepairs except those in groups of \fIvalue2\fR adjacent basepairs of which \fIvalue1\fR can form.  \fIvalue2\fR is the same as \fIvalue1\fR if unspecified.  Default is 2 of 2.  (See also the \fB--noisolate\fR option above.)
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP UNAFOLDDAT
an alternate location from which to read the energy rules.  The default energy rules can be overridden with files in the current directory or in the directory pointed to by UNAFOLDDAT.  \fBUNAFold.pl\fR looks for each file first in the current directory, then in the directory specified by UNAFOLDDAT and last in \fI/usr/local/share/unafold\fR (or wherever the energy rules were installed).
.SH REFERENCES
Markham, N. R. and Zuker, M. (2008) UNAFold: software for nucleic acid folding and hybridization.  In Keith, J. M., editor, \fIBioinformatics, Volume II.  Structure, Functions and Applications\fR, number 453 in \fIMethods in Molecular Biology\fR, chapter 1, pages 3-31.  Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.  ISBN 978-1-60327-428-9.
.P
Other references which may be useful may be found at http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/refs.php.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR hybrid-ss-min (1),
.BR hybrid-min (1),
.BR h-num.pl (1),
.BR ss-count.pl (1),
.BR ct2rnaml (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Nick Markham <markhn@rpi.edu> and Michael Zuker <zukerm@rpi.edu>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2006-2008, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
.SH AVAILABILITY
UNAFold is available from http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/unafold/.  Commercial use requires a license; see http://dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/commercial.php.
